3D-ID

Folks,
I’m a week or more behind schedule.  But I’ve finally whipped up a very brief outline.  I propose that we now (will change later) work on a rotating plan (Bill, Audris, Maria, Robin, repeat).  I’ve resurrected parts of the email exchanges that got us to this point.  It’s important to note that I promised the other 3 CSAFE PIs the opportunity to join in once we had a serious outline.  To be operational, I declare this the start and ask that
as you each take your turn you try to do it in less than a week.  Nobody is measuring how much you did during that week but just that you keep it short.

After Robin hands the ball back to me before the end of the month, I plan to eyeball it and then send it to the other three CSAFE PIs.

Bill

Draft 0.0
————————————
Introduction

	Software review

	Statistics
	
	Reproducibility

	Forensic Anthropology

	Human Phylogeny
		
	Outline

Phrenology

	Definition

	History

	People

	Discredited (Reminds me of Eugenics)

fMRI
	Brain Anatomy
	
	Brain Function

	MRI & fMRI

	Atlases

Reproducibility

The Software Review

	Code

	GUI

	Database

	PCA

	Statistics


End draft 0.0

Some email excerpts among CSAFE PIs (A=Alicia Carraquiry,ISU, K=Karen Kafadar,UVa, H=Hal Stern, UCI) in chronological order.  I got some announcement about a new release of the software and kind of glanced at it and sent the first email to the PIs.

August 10

This sounds an awful lot like institutionalized phrenology.  I thought that had been
totally debunked in the 19th century,

Bill
————————————————
What does "phrenology" mean????

Alicia
——————————
Phrenology was an old “science" where experts claimed to be able to infer things about an individual
by measuring and touching their head.  The idea was that the shape of the skull implied things about
the brain.

I note that in the modern world (last 25 years) cognitive psychologists use fMRI to infer brain activity
but the signals are usually so weak that they “average” across individuals after a spatial transformation
to attempt to bring them into the same “coordinate system.”  I have, with no success, railed against
this since I first heard the idea.  To try to clarify, it is reasonably well-known and understood that the ability
to use language is lateralized (exists on one side of the brain) and that left handed people have language 
lateralized to a different side than right handed people.  For this reason most fMRI language studies
use the Glasgow handedness test to eliminate “left handed” people as subjects.  Of course, it not known
if blue eyes are related to the ability to throw a baseball, or if blonde hair is related to the ability to do arithmetic.
And, of course, we don’t know if, with extensive training one could move any lateralization to the “other side.”
I, for example have a left handed older sister and she taught me to swing a baseball bat (so I’m a lefty) and that
naturally spilled over into golf which my sister has never played (i’m a lefty again).  I am right handed in
everything else that I know of.

The spatial transforms used in these methods are named after the Individual who collected the images
that are the bases of the particular transform.  The first was Tailarach (-Tournoux); a more modern one
is Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) and so forth.  There is very little reason to think that the individuals
in a particular experiment correspond in any particular way to the individuals used to generate a particular
transform.

Bill
———————————————————————
this is incredibly interesting!  I wonder if we should write a paper on it,
and/or get Spencer to do another series of articles.
Karen
———————————————
Wow!  Fascinating!  You are quite the expert!  Super interesting, and I bet that those guys who wrote the software know nothing about this.

A
——————————————————
The software was developed by Ann Ross, a professor of biological sciences at NC State.  She got her Ph.D. at UT Knoxville
(think Dawnie Steadman) in Forensic Anthropology in 2000 and appears to be closely connected to the NC state forensic lab.  For those of
you who don’t know, a former student of mine (25 years ago) holds an endowed chair in CS at UT Knoxville and despite
decades of experience in collaboration was unable to get Dawnie to work with him on an NIJ funded project (LaPorte) to turn her
material into a useful database.  He did get access to her data.  I will follow up with him.

There is no sign that Ross had any input from statistics or is even remotely aware that the methods I mentioned in my previous
note have been in extensive use in fMRI studies for decades.  The goals of the two fields are quite different.  She also seems not to be
experienced with computing and outsourced the software work to someone at FSU.

It appears that all Ross has are measurements from forensic skulls whereas the fMRI folks use MR images of living people which are
inherently more detailed.  I repeat, the goals of the two fields are different.  I further note that I recall that in CR Rao’s book on linear statistical
inference he had an example based on cranial measurements; I’ll try to look it up.

I don’t know the Spencer you refer to is.  We have a graduate student named Neil Spencer who worked on shoe prints.  Last year’s
SPAIG award included Bruce Spencer at Northwestern.  I doubt it’s either of them.

Bill
—————————————————
Spencer Hsu, the journalist from the WaPo.

A
—————————————————
Don't know a ton about this type of morphometry work but do have some relevant experience.
I used to do some work with a psychiatrist who used a lot of 2-d and 3-d measurements of facial and cranial landmarks and was able to associate them with a number of diagnoses.  One that I remember is that there is a tendency towards larger head size in autistic children.
Hal
—————————————
Sounds like a great plan.  Please follow through.

A
————————————————
A few random thoughts:
- I thought of that section in CR Rao's book too!
- I think Alyson Wilson (Alicia's former colleague) is at the Forensics Center at NCSU, so maybe she knows something about it.
 K
August 11
——————————————————
Additional Info

I know Alyson.  She got a MS in Statistics at CMU before she got her Ph.D. at Duke, went
to Los Alamos, then to ISU then to DC and now to NCSU.

Part of the reason that I’ve included these excerpts is to expose you to the idea that
even very smart people don’t know anything about this stuff, primarily because they have
never been prompted to think about it.  Years ago, at my last meeting as Chair of the 
Committee on National Statistics at the National Academies, I was asked (as a kind of
honor) to talk about my research about functional brain imaging.  The research spans
statistics, imaging physics, cognitive psychology, etc., etc.  The committee members had two kinds of reactions: a) this is not related to my personal narrow focus on Federal
statistics so I’m going to sleep; b) this is absolutely amazing! How did Bill get to be
chair of the most important statistics organization in the country?  This is completely unrelated.